and looking at Shirley Turner's dissertation,
and there was a Swiss scientist, Giovanoli.
Giovanoli spent his life studying, he's a
chemist, studying manganese oxides. He's
considered sort of the dean of manganese oxides.
in that part of the world. And he said Totorochite
didn't exist. And it was awful hard to settle that
argument. So this Sri Lankan student that I had, a
postdoc really, who was working with me on
different projects, I said one day we ought to try
to synthesize some and some other manganese
oxides. And within a year, I think, we had
synthesized totorokite. No one had ever done that
before. We published that in Science. in, I don't
know, 83 years, or a number of years ago, I'll say.
And since then, the industry's been interested in
Todoroki. And I've had interviews with some of
them. It's a big open structure, kind of like these
pictures you're drawing here. And there's water
in the tunnels. And they wanted to make a battery
out of it. When I was at Arizona State, the reason
they were studying manganese oxide is because
these little batteries that I wear in my ears here,
they are probably manganese oxide batteries.
Many small button-sized batteries have
manganese oxides in them. But the chemistry of
those manganese oxides and the structural
chemistry is not well understood.
Todoroki was considered by the industry, and they
published on it, but they never developed a
battery from it. Well, we went on, and in addition,
we got good cooperation from the Swiss scientist
Giovanni Olli. He said it's his work.
and we synthesized other manganese oxides and
then we identified them in soils from the Brazos
River bottom and in other soils and they are still
an area of sort of the forefront of our mineralogy
because the crystals are so poorly formed and so
difficult to analyze but yet Now more recently, I
was finishing up a student, a Korean student,
who's now gone back to Korea. And this is a twist in
terms of research. had a Canadian student in
class, and one morning when he was in, before the
offices were open, he got this phone call. And this
was someone from a drilling fluid company in
Houston who said, we want to talk to someone that
knows about iron oxides because we want to use them
in drilling fluid, because we want to drill a new
oil well in a place where there isn't, it was an oil
well once before, but it's failed, on the tidal
zone of Louisiana, just across the line into
Louisiana. Would you be interested in that? Well,
he's a student, and he said, to give the
information to me, he said, you might be
interested in calling them back. They gave us, I
think it was $30,000 to do that project. We knew all
along really what they needed to know about this
iron oxide. And what they wanted us to say was that
they could use this iron oxide and it wouldn't
create any environmental hazard there. And they
did some excellent work there. They spent a lot of
money, special equipment, to use hematite and
recover the hematite because you could recover
it. It's a weighting material. That's what adds to
the density of the mass of this mixture of clay and
iron oxide, in this case, to bring the rocks up out
of the oil well. And they normally use barite, but
in the tidal zone, if the sulfate is reduced to
sulfide, then that releases the barium, and the
barium is a heavy metal, which is very toxic. Well,
when we got through with that part of it, we said,
well, what else is in your drilling fluid? Oh, we
use some chromium humates. Chromium? Chromium is
not a very friendly term. It's another heavy
metal. And that student finished a certain part of
that work on his dissertation, and I was desperate
to support him, because he wanted to finish out
more than that. He'd gotten a lot of momentum. Very
diligent student, somewhat slow starter. And so I
called around, and Wayne Jordan in Water
Resources said, call our new leader out in the GUSH
Center.
His last name began with a Z, I think.
Anyway, he said he's trying to get some joint work
going. Maybe you could join together with him. He
could handle the policy side and you could handle
the science side.
Ernie Vedlitz. You may know him. Ernie. And I
called Ernie and talked to him. So I went out and we
met him and took the student out. And the upshot of
it was that those soils that we studied in a
post-doc jointly shared project, if they have
manganese in them, manganese oxides in them, they
will oxidize chromium and make it more soluble and
mobile. this local Brazos County soil has very
little manganese in it, very, very little, and not
much iron oxide. It would be a great place to put
waste drilling fluid. Now that's not a kind of
popular thing that people want to talk about
because not exactly everybody wants somebody
dumping their waste in their backyard, but we did
find that Some soils are very bad to put it in
because that chromium may become soluble and
enter into the groundwater. And while we need a
little chromium for our blood, for our sugar
metabolism, we don't need very much. And so that
was one of my areas of interest, but grew out of
these other. Of all the research projects you've
done, is there one that you're most proudest to
claim?
Well, we were first to synthesize Todorokite.
Doug Ming's work on zeolites has grown into a lot.
Several of my colleagues have worked with the
Zeoponics thing and NASA and some here at A&M and
some in other places in that development. So you
see, it's not my research really, it's mostly my
students' research, is what it amounts to.
There are other areas even that are evolving now,
but those are two of the highlights. The manganese
oxide. See, there were several dominoes that had
to fall to make that possible. The sabbatical the
electron microscopy, the need for understanding
chromium, and having the skills. I'm
particularly proud of that. The work with the
rice, we showed that there was ferrihydride in the
soil where nobody else had done that before.
Dr. Monroe, one of the things I've concluded in my
latter years is that those of us who work in these
complex natural systems, we rarely solve all of a
problem. We usually bring forth our knowledge to
solve part of the problem. And we improve the
technology and the science, but We don't put it
completely to rest very often. But there's a lot of
utility in what we do. And just like that spinoff of
NASA, you see, that obviously is very much outside
of our expected area of contribution. And I was
thinking, of all the projects you've mentioned, a
whole bunch of them were not necessarily
agricultural. Yes, that's right. The funding for
your work, did you get much outside funding or was
by and large most of it through the experiment
station? I've had quite a lot of outside funding,
although not as much as some others. My area is a bit
more basic, and it's more difficult for me to
attack these funds that are attached to certain
practical problems. But the most funding
probably was during the collaborative years with
Hosner when we were working on mine spoil
reclamation. and that was recognized as a big
problem area for the state. And for about ten years
we worked diligently on that and published papers
and books in significant number. Other
major funders or fund sources? Before I came,
actually, I had an NSF grant for an instrument at
Auburn. And that contributed to my program there
and contributed to my understanding of that
method, which we have available today. What are
some of the honors that your teaching and research
has brought? Well, as you know, I received the
research award from the Alumni Association quite
a number of years ago. In the 70s, I think.
This is a different watch. The first one wore out.
Really? And mine's still going. Well, you're
kinder to it than I was with mine. So it'll take me a
few minutes to give you the. Was it when we were
still doing it secretly? When you did, did you know
it had been? Yes, it was found secret. And how did
you feel that day? Oh, I was, I will always remember
that. I was strangely impressed by the fact that
the director of the Experiment Station, Neville
Clark, seemed to be interested in sitting close to
me. I thought that was something kind of strange.
And that was a great day. Now, of all the things, I
was going to make some comments about
administration. That would be one of the positive
comments I would make, The awards program, these
watch fobs are a very significant part of our
recognizing people's success. And I got an award
in Washington for collaborative work with
several people in the Reclamation area from the US
Department of Agriculture. Unfortunately, the
Secretary of Agriculture, who gave it to us, was
later convicted of crime. which I think later was
maybe rescinded. But anyway, I'm still proud of
the award. I'm sorry we had some indiscretions
there at some point. Let me turn this off. But the
awards by the Former Students Association and
then the awards in the more scientific
professional areas by our own departments, which
are usually through national science
organizations. That is well developed at A&M. My
former department heads worked at it, and
Runge was particularly adept at that. And that's
quite important. A young faculty member has some
some apprehensions, and of course I came here as a
professor, but then you kind of go through that
when you're new anywhere. And having an award
system that kind of keeps people aware of what they
do, and having another thing that we do here that's
quite good, I think, I don't know how much it's
being pushed today, but we worked at it quite a bit.
And that is, whenever we get a new faculty member,
we signed a mentor, at least one, to it. And that's,
you were talking about being accepted into the
local culture, and that's very important, I
think. Did you ever think about leaving? Oh, yes,
yes, I have. You know, different people have
different views on their professions and what
they want to do with them. And why am I in Texas?
Well, some people would say one of the
disadvantages of being at Texas A&M is we don't
have any mountains, we don't have any lakes, at
least not very many. And the climate is just so-so.
But this is a good place to work with a lot of other
people who like to work on creative things. And the
fact that we don't have to be bothered with the
beach, ten miles away or something, or even next
door, and other distractions like that. That's
not a problem with me at all. I enjoy what I do and
have throughout my tenure here. I would say,
speaking for a moment on the social side of things,
The issues of the Bryan Eagle published this
summer pointing up the fact that poverty is much
higher in the abounding surrounding counties
than it is in Brazos County, which is certainly not
new, but it really emphasized what I think is a
concern of mine, and I think it's a concern that
should be a bit more of the community. And what
research I'm going to try to accomplish within my
next year, which may well be my last year of real
active research, who knows, I'm trying to address
a bit of that.
In a sense, being given hard times, in a sense of
being in a rather unspectacular
environment, is a stimulus. And it's been a great
place. It probably helps us to enjoy the people
somewhat more. For you and your family, what did
you all do for joy, fun, diversion, satisfaction?
Very often with the family, we would go where I had
formerly gone at a scientific meeting. Because at
a scientific meeting, I'm an outdoors kind of
person. almost always I'd go on a field trip. And of
course I would see some of the local culture even
though I wasn't much involved. Therefore,
whenever I thought about where to go and the family
had heard about the place, well that sounded like
it might be a pretty interesting place to go. And
one of the attributes of this focal area of science
that I work in, clay mineralogy, is that there is a
national organization that's not terribly
large. It's grown from perhaps 100 during my
career up to maybe 500 or 600 or more at this stage.
And
they can meet in some nice places. Whereas the
American Society of Agronomy, of course, is my
bigger umbrella organization, they can only meet
in big cities. And so I have sort of been privileged
to go to some very nice places. And then my family
and I have gone. Sometimes they join me for the
meetings, but oftentimes it's a follow through.
Do you have a hobby or hobbies? Photography has
always interested me, and I think taking pictures
is probably the most of a hobby I have. I enjoy, as a
boy, I enjoyed fishing, and when I had sons that
were in a fishing age, we fished as a family. Where?
In Lake Somerville, and once to Trinity River Lake
on the east of here, and occasionally in
somebody's private pond. But, and I have deer
hunted a little bit, and I think my sons, perhaps
one of them, has done a little of that. But I, one has
a different view on those kinds of activities here
without knowing the landowners than what I had
when I was a rural youth in western Kentucky. So
that changes the climate quite a bit. Where you
knew everybody. Right.
We're going to start at the university and the
college and the department. How has Texas A&M
changed, in your opinion, in these 30 plus years,
for better or for worse? Well, we have really
wonderful facilities. This university is, I
think, an envy of many places. And when I travel in
the USA and other countries, we have some of the
very nicest buildings. We have some of the nicest
remodeled buildings. So we've got buildings that
were Some of them built quite a number of years ago,
but they've been very well refurbished and are
quite nice. And we don't have buildings that we're
ashamed of on the campus, I would say, which some
universities struggle with that. So I think
that's one of our big assets here. And the fact that
we're growing, there's something about the
momentum, the vigor that goes with growing. Are we
today as an institution making progress, you
think? I think we're making a lot of progress. that
we're, I like to dwell only on that, but I would like
to just say that I think that we're struggling with
how to deal with that song, and I don't know the
answer to that. But I think we need to step back and
perhaps get out of our box completely and go to some
quiet places for some small meetings and think
about how to to keep people more involved
throughout their careers. You've been able to
teach throughout your career. I think that's a
great attribute. And the interaction with
students is very important. And we should sustain
that. And I enjoy that. I go to Mexico and teach a
week every year for four years. And I'll go again
this year. And they don't pay me money for that. I
work extra to do it, but I do it because I want to
interact with the students and in, of course, a
very different soils environment, so I learn
quite a bit. But even though they speak Spanish and
I speak English, we have some interpreters and
some of them speak pretty well in English. And
that's a great experience just to interact with
eager Some of them are more mature, some of them are
professional already, and some of them are just in
the senior year or so. And the same thing in this
country. And so I think one of the frustrations I
would say that seems inherent, and colleagues
mention this to me more than any other, I don't hear
much complaining, but one thing that is
occasionally mentioned is, We don't quite know
how to interact with the administration.
And we have a high regard for our administration.
This institution has done really well to put in
people that are sound people in principle. And we
have confidence in them. But we don't quite know
how to deal with communication up and down the
administrative scale, as I perceive it. I'm not
going to ask the negative. Of the presidents and
the provosts and the deans that you've dealt with,
which one, to which of those would you give the
highest grades or highest rankings? Who are the
great presidents, provosts, deans? Well, part of
that is historically datable, I think, in a sense
that Rudder has to be the greatest, but Rudder
could not have necessarily been the greatest if he
hadn't been here when the university was making
great strides for him. But we, as I see it, we chose a
person, I don't know if you'd say it was a rebel, but
a person who had somewhat revolutionary ideas and
openness for this climate, and he had the respect
of of the old ags and the respect of others, so
therefore he could go forward and people were
pleased to follow, even though they may have
disagreed with him on small points. So I certainly
have to hold him very high. Any other presidents
you'd give him? I thought Williams was very
scholarly, very much a person that we held in high
regard. I was never very close to him, didn't have
much occasion to be, although he did attend the
same church that I did as I recall. And I certainly
had a high regard for him.
My predecessor George Coonsey, as a dean of the
graduate school, I thought he was a good leader. He
knew where he stood, and he communicated well with
us, and he understood our situation. And I was
sorry when he moved on, although he served his time
well. And he's still someone who I like to
communicate with when I get a chance.
I have, as I mentioned to you,
Kunkel as the dean was a good dean. And Neville
Clark, I thought, was a very good, not a
particularly, I wouldn't say that Neville Clark
was the kind of guy, if you took a poll, he'd get a
popularity contest. He's not quite that kind of
personality. But he was very, I learned Neville
Clark when I was on the Electron Mic Committee, and
they ask him to monitor a decision on what that
committee should be doing on some instrument or
something. And I found out right away that he was an
exceptionally good diplomat. And he was able to
keep the committee going on a creative track in a
reasonable time and not get everybody at odds. And
that, I think, is a great attribute. And so I
thought he was a good leader, excellent leader.
I'm not much to raise anything but high marks for
those administrators. Are there some
opportunities,
either at departmental college or university
level, that you now in hindsight think that we
missed? Are there some things that we might have
done that we didn't do? Yes, I do. I think two things
that we could do. One of them is research
equipment. As I told you earlier, I'm using the
same x-ray machine that George Kunze used before
me. It was relatively new. But I've been here for
30-plus years, and it would have been extremely
difficult for me to get a new one. Other
instruments that we would like to have, we have not
been able to get them very promptly. And we've had
to go and use them elsewhere. You can do a lot with
instruments in other locations. But you sure can
do a lot more if they're next door and you can be in
with them daily. And A&M needs to provide readily
accessible basic research instruments. Better
as I view it and I know a lot of my colleagues would
reflect that too I think sabbatical Needs more
nurturing and it probably needs nurturing in in
different ways in my case going away for I think ten
and a half months and That was great. I made a little
financial sacrifice, I guess, but I was able to get
some support on the other end and get that
together. To really learn how to use the kind of
instrument I wanted to use, I couldn't do it in a
month or a few months because the book, the
instrument was booked heavily. I could only get on
it so many hours a week. And therefore, I had to sort
of move along with everybody else. And so having a
long sabbatical of six months to a year is really
important. And I don't know how to...
Another avenue that's kind of related to that. In
my work with the people in Mexico, I find that they
have a different cadence from what we do. And I
don't mean that in a critical way exactly. They
just have to deal with a different set of
constraints. And we really need interaction with
these developing countries, Mexico in
particular, I think. And I have wanted to be able to
bring those people in for short stints. And they
have come, some on their own, But now that's
expecting a whole lot. And they could only stay
like two weeks. And I get some support within our
experiment station this summer. I got some
support for a young woman to come for two weeks to
finish up certain mineralogy on her thesis, which
she's now finishing down there. I think we need to
have some flexibility in the comings and goings of
our faculty for Research and teaching.
And I think that it has to be, it should be more
flexible to be more effective. And there's just
hardly anything that's more stimulating than
changing environments. All right, now in my
hypothetical case, you are a consultant. and
you've been hired to give consulting advice to the
department and to the college and to the
university about its future. What advice would
you give to your department about what it should
do? To my department? Mm-hmm. In the future.
Introspective
meeting. with away from the local scene. And
now we've done some of this.